One day, Hadja Nasreddin was sitting in a teahouse, drinking tea.
A teahouse owner approached him and asked him,
Hadja, take this horse home.
To which he replied, I don't know where her house is.
You just lead her on the road, she will find her own house.
The teahouse owner said.
So Hadja did.
He led the horse on the road, and when she was ordering,
he made her return to the road.
Finally, the horse turned into the yard, and Hadja turned after her.
The owner came out, and when he turned to Hadja, he said,
Sir, how did you know that this was my horse?
To which Hadja replied, I didn't know that this was your horse.
I was just drawing her attention to the road.
So I wanted to show you that marketing is a science that shows
which road successful businessmen are walking on,
which road to profit is.
What is marketing?
A little about the history of marketing.
Marketing is a fairly new science.
The term marketing first appeared in the 19th and 20th centuries.
In the United States, it was considered as a method
and organization of sales operations.
Since the 1930s, marketing has become an integrated function
of business activity.
This was due to the problems that the American economy faced.
You probably remember that in 1929, a crisis broke out in America,
which was later called the Great Depression.
It was the Americans who first noticed that they had learned
to produce so many goods, but these goods were of no use to society.
Barges were being sown in the Atlantic Ocean.
This depression helped many businessmen to understand
that it is important to produce not what you can,
but what you need.
Since the 1930s, marketing has become an integrated function
that unites the whole business, finance, production, management.
Since the 1960s, marketing has spread to the non-commercial organizations
and services.
This is a completely new direction that is very popular in Europe,
but has not yet captured the Russian market.
Since the 1990s, marketing has been viewed
from the perspective of the so-called ethical or socially responsible business.
The first problem that marketers face is the variety of definitions.
In scientific literature, some scientists believe that there are 2,500,
some say that there are 5,000, and some say that there are 1,000 definitions.
Therefore, it would be very important for me to understand
what marketing looks like in general.
There are four levels of marketing at the enterprise.
The first is marketing of products, the second is marketing of the company,
the third is marketing of the managers, and the fourth is self-marketing.
In English, it is called marketing yourself.
In addition, we have to understand the context of our business.
Depending on where we work, we are more interested in industrial marketing,
the famous B2B, marketing of consumer goods,
the so-called B2C marketing, marketing of services,
marketing of public and charitable organizations, or international marketing.
Recently, a lot of other marketing has appeared, which are related to technology.
You probably heard that there is creative marketing,
provocative marketing, classical, competitive, strategic, tactical,
programmable, and, finally, socially responsible.
Probably some of you know the famous Kottler triad,
which claims that, among other things,
in a company, especially a small and medium-sized business,
we should take care not only of classical marketing,
but also of internal marketing and marketing of relations.
And finally, there is another aspect of marketing
that interests Russian entrepreneurs today.
This is marketing of attracting customers and maintaining customers.
Of all this set of marketing, I want to focus on one,
which I called strategic marketing.
Unfortunately, in Russia, it pays too little attention to it,
rather referring to the fact that there is no time,
or wishing to get a quick profit.
Strategic marketing is, in fact, what determines the structure of our course.
This is the ability to segment the market,
choose target audiences, and position your products and companies.
A small preamble before we start.
In one of the kiosks of the Academy of People's Economy,
I bought a pen from a Japanese company called Zebra.
This pen is no different from anything,
except that it smells like vanilla.
And when a person writes a letter, he hears this smell.
The second pen, which this company produces,
is also very unusual.
You can write with different colors at the same time.
But the most interesting for me was the pen from a Japanese company called Kakuya,
which opens in a very peculiar way.
Most of my students can never open it,
because they are used to opening it in two ways.
Either this way, or that way.
In fact, it opens when it breaks in the middle.
This is what determines the success of a company in many cases.
What happened here?
Japanese companies realized that they need to segment the market,
look for new niches,
and not just sell products and try to play with the price or advertising.
So, look at this slide.
The first three definitions are very important for strategic marketing.
The first is segmentation.
In Russian, these two terms are used,
although in English they literally mean segmentation.
But Russian-language publications are more inclined to segmentation.
This is the division of the market into small groups,
each of which requires a separate marketing approach or a separate product.
We will devote a certain part of our lesson to this topic.
The next step is the selection of target segments,
the selection of the target audience,
the evaluation of the attractiveness of each segment,
and the selection of one or more segments for the acquisition.
And finally, the last fundamental principle is positioning.
So, segmentation.
The famous Kottler definition.
The selection of a group of consumers clearly defined within the market,
who differ in their needs, characteristics, or behavior,
for the service of which certain goods or marketing complexes may be required.
I think this definition is very important to understand.
If you see different consumers in the market,
you should understand that they should be offered a different pen,
or they should be processed differently to make a purchase,
namely, to use the famous 4P in a different way.
And in order to explain to you what the importance of market segmentation is,
I would like to tell you a little about the background.
When the restructuring processes began in Russia,
most companies that were engaged in business were inclined to so-called mass marketing.
What does this mean?
There were three segments on the market.
One, two, and three.
People are rich, poor, middle class,
but the company offered the same product.
An example of this is, for example, the famous hand-in-hand newspaper,
which is still being produced.
It offered advertising services, for example, real estate,
household electronics, cars, construction materials, and much more.
Unfortunately, or fortunately, the market has become very dynamic,
competition has emerged in the market,
and many companies have realized that each segment needs its own product.
This is how the basis of differentiated marketing appears.
What does this mean?
The company thinks that there are different segments,
and they need to create their own products.
This is how a lot of advertising publications appeared,
which advertise computers, real estate, food products, cars.
And from hand-in-hand, the newspaper begins to experience huge problems.
But, oddly enough, for small businesses,
today, they often have to limit themselves to the third level of marketing,
which is called concentrated marketing.
What does this mean?
I understand that I cannot serve all markets,
I cannot serve large enterprises and small ones,
I cannot serve, for example, the gas or oil industry,
and I have to focus on one segment.
This kind of marketing is called concentrated marketing.
In conclusion, I can only say that concentrated marketing and differentiated marketing
are what gives the opportunity to survive in a company.
Massive marketing sooner or later leads to bankruptcy.
In order to show you what segmenting gives to companies,
I would like to give an example of Johnny Walker,
the famous whiskey, which is produced in Scotland.
Until 1980, despite its centuries-old history,
Johnny Walker was produced in one form,
Johnny Walker Red Label.
It cost 9 pounds per liter in Great Britain.
Despite its marketing activity, the company could not increase its sales,
because this market is very competitive.
Since 1980, the company realized that it needed to switch from undifferentiated mass marketing
to differentiated marketing.
This is how new brands are created.
Johnny Walker Red Label remains as the leading product,
and then Black Label, Swing, Blue and Honor appear.
Please note that their prices are significantly different.
For example, the last type of whiskey is sold at a price of 129 pounds per liter.
The company did not increase its sales in decaliters,
but it significantly increased profits.
What did this show?
It showed that the company created that there are different consumers on the market
who need different products.
For example, for daily consumption, I can buy Red Label,
but if I go to visit, I am probably ashamed to buy a cheap bottle of whiskey.
I will most likely buy Black Label,
but if I go to my boss for his anniversary,
maybe I will want to buy Honor.
The advantage of segmentation can be reflected in the example shown on this slide.
Many airlines began to create differentiated marketing,
creating economy, business and first class tickets in their salons.
Please note that mass marketing,
when the company loads the plane at the standard price of the economy class,
for example, at the price of 250 pounds,
it receives only 5,200 pounds of profit.
And a company that creates differentiation within the framework of one plane,
creating economy, business and first class,
receives a profit of more than 37,000 pounds on one flight.
Thus, we come to the key element of why market segmentation is necessary.
I have shown you several examples that confirm that segmentation is a very important tool for increasing sales.
But in reality, segmentation plays several more roles.
The first one affects the image of the company,
it shows the prospects of the company's growth,
and of course, it allows to concentrate resources more deeply,
or to concentrate resources on the most attractive segments.
The problem of segmentation is always the most difficult,
because it is not an intellectual exercise.
Mr. Kotler, who is so popular in Russia,
divides the market into consumer goods and industrial goods,
suggesting that each market has its own approach to segmentation.
If you work in the consumer goods market,
you may need geographical, demographic, psychological and behavioral variables for segmentation.
The industrial goods market is more complex.
Look, here are very important factors, such as demographic,
for example, the system of organization of purchases and individual characteristics of customers.
This is the most complex market.
Nevertheless, there is a certain rule on how to segment the market.
My question is, first, decide what market you work in,
and then answer the question,
if there is a certain group of customers,
who are different in their behavior,
that is, they demonstrate behavioral homogeneity when purchasing your product.
Let it be called a qualitative study,
to understand whether there are among your consumers,
consumers who react equally to your marketing,
or who make the same demands when making a purchase.
Let's move on to a small practical exercise.
Suggest your own way of segmenting the market of retail consumers.
When I ask this question at many seminars,
people try to find the answer and suggest segmenting the market,
segmenting consumers by income, gender, age.
In fact, this is not a very simple question.
Therefore, in order to return to it,
I would like to show you that there is no algorithm in segmenting,
by which any person can make one thing and move on to another,
and complete this process effectively.
This is the first step.
Pay attention to the fact that I always consider in my programs
the segmentation of one of the very famous English companies,
Crystal Clear, which produces lead crystals.
This brand is considered prestigious,
and its products are highly valued and are mostly purchased as gifts.
As a rule, in order to show the diversity of segmentation,
these two examples are very clear.
The first example
Now look at the answer to the first question.
Look at how retail networks segment their consumers.
Oddly enough, two factors are very important for them.
How often do people go to the store and how much do they buy?
Based on this, there are four main segments
that are important for retail networks.
Frequently and frequently buying.
These are regular customers who come to the store
and on Saturdays usually buy large cartons of products for the whole week.
Frequently but rarely buying.
These are customers who live near the stores.
They often come in, for example, grandmothers and students,
but unfortunately they buy little.
Rarely but frequently buying.
People who rarely go to this store,
and unfortunately, they buy a lot,
buying the whole cart.
And finally, the segment that is called rare and rare,
buying or not buying at all.
In relation to each segment,
the company must build its own policy
and choose a means of engaging them in sales.
Now look at the answer to how the famous English company Crystal Clear
makes its segmentation.
It segments by product.
Regular gifts for various anniversaries,
retirement, birthday, romantic dates,
public holidays and festivals.
The second segment is wedding gifts,
when young couples start buying expensive dishes for their home.
Gifts such as money, business gifts,
and presentations to stimulate sales,
and special gifts such as prizes at sports competitions.
This segmentation allows the company to understand
that if for the first three segments it is important to work with retail networks,
then for the last two segments direct sales are important.
I would like to show you the segmentation of the Nokia mobile phone market.
Each of us is a buyer of Nokia,
and when we approach the mobile phone stand,
we are not aware of it,
but we are a segmentation tool for the manufacturers.
Look, Nokia highlights four groups of consumers.
Buyers are oriented to style,
buyers are oriented to image,
businessmen and buyers are oriented to practicality.
In each case, the company offers its own product,
realizing that it does not leave a niche for competitors,
in which it can work and earn money.
At the same time, pay attention to this slide
and tell me what kind of buyers you are in terms of Nokia segmentation.
Segmentation in Impel.com.
It seems to me that this is the most difficult topic,
how mobile operators today seek to segment the market.
I put a question mark,
because I understand that segmentation cannot be perfect.
Nevertheless, I was convinced by the classes with different groups of listeners
that most of them, one way or another, pursue the following goals,
and, accordingly, can relate to one or another group of segments.
Students are people who speak little and pay little.
The second group is young families.
They speak a lot, but they do not have enough money,
and therefore they pay little.
Entrepreneurs are people who speak a lot, but they do not have enough money,
and they pay a lot.
The peculiarity of segmentation is that when a marketer starts this procedure,
he must understand the following.
It is important not only to highlight the variable segmentation,
but also to name the market segments beautifully.
This is the culture of marketing.
It is, of course, different from the financial culture or the culture of management of staff.
Therefore, a very important element is how we name our groups of consumers.
In the United States of America, there is a very famous magazine called Sport Illustrated.
If we look at the Russian Internet,
we will notice that almost all the photos of athletes are borrowed from this magazine.
If we look at the segmentation of the magazine market,
we will see a lot of ideas.
Nevertheless, this option shows how unsystematic segmentation can be.
This is the corporate segmentation of this famous magazine.
Those who want to have fun,
this is the first segment that Sport Illustrated would like to offer.
Those who want to satisfy their magazine with articles,
those who need facts about sports,
they are offered reviews, statistics, biographies,
and collections of sports related items.
This magazine publishes various stories and tells about sports items.
Finally, those who need advice.
Please note that there are several criteria for segmentation.
It is very difficult to say why certain items were chosen.
The consequence of such segmentation is the policy of this magazine.
Look, Sport Illustrated, in addition to publishing a magazine with relevant articles for its readers,
also publishes specialized publications, materials, books, video recordings, children's publications,
and finally organizes trips to sports events.
I wanted to show that market segmentation often pushes companies to expand their services,
understanding what their clients ask for.
Now about this slide.
80% of people who come to seminars on marketing in Russia
are people who represent the so-called B2B sector.
Business to business.
These are people who work in companies and, thanks to direct sales or direct work with clients,
sell, for example, metal, machines, accessories, and much more.
They often ask how to segment their consumers,
and what to do when price competition increases.
I always return to this situation by showing this slide.
The most important thing if you want to get rid of competition and make money
in conditions of increasing competition is the correct segmentation.
Almost 60% of companies working in the B2B sector in Europe segment the market as follows.
Those who are focused on price, those who are focused on service,
and those who are focused on long-term relations.
This means that such a policy should exist in Russian companies as well.
Surely, there are buyers in your company who value price very much.
If you offer a price higher than the competitors, they will most likely turn to the latter.
Therefore, you should understand that if you think that this segment is important to you,
and you want to sell it,
you should offer a low price and a minimal set of services and functions.
The second segment is those who are focused on service.
These are buyers who are ready to overpay if you provide delivery,
training, payment time, or something else.
And finally, the third segment, which is very important, at least in Europe,
is those who are focused on long-term relations.
As a rule, large companies, for example, factories that produce cars, household appliances,
are interested in their suppliers being reliable.
In this regard, their price may be of greater interest to a lesser extent.
How ready are you to produce the first reliable, the second high-quality product,
and how stable are you ready to deliver this product, for example, to the conveyor, exactly on time?
Look at this slide.
I think it is very important for describing the segmentation in the B2B sector.
This is a study by McKinsey, a steel consumer.
How do they choose their suppliers?
Please note that McKinsey also refers to the fact that there are 30 types of segments in this industry,
clients who are focused on price, services, and long-term relations.
If we take the criteria of the assessment of 1 unimportant, 4 important, 4-point system,
you will notice that each segment sets its own requirements.
Each segment of the buyer offers its own requirements for the supplier.
For example, the lowest price, you see, is of interest to the first segment,
this is a segment that is focused on price.
Companies with so-called interest in services are more interested in other aspects than price
and are ready to pay at a higher price.
Please note that for those who buy at a low price,
and in Russia this is a mass of small and medium-sized enterprises,
for example, buying the same metal,
are interested in instant response, timely delivery.
Companies that are primarily interested in services,
instant response is very important for them,
that the product is in stock, timely delivery,
and client-orientedness during the conclusion of the deal.
The next slide shows that there are several more criteria for buyers in the B2B sector.
For example, the short delivery time, how long the product should be delivered.
I have noticed that companies that are focused on services would like to receive it on time.
And to a lesser extent, these companies are interested in technical support
or, for example, loyalty to the industry,
that is, the commitment of the manufacturer to this industry.
Please note the following factors.
Companies that are interested in long-term relations,
are generally interested in developing their supplier.
Therefore, it is important for them how much the supplier is interested in research,
in private scientific investments in them,
whether they are ready to support their supplier with various kinds of technical consultations.
And for them, of course, loyalty to this supplier is very important,
namely, how long do you, as a supplier, expect to work in this industry,
or are you ready to leave this industry at any given moment and find a better application for your finances.
I would like you to ask the following question based on the results of my short lecture.
Can you describe the products for each segment?
What does it mean?
The materials, the workbook that is offered to our CD allows you to do the following.
First, try to choose market segments.
Second, you should evaluate market segments.
You will see a system of criteria that is offered within the framework of my course.
But the third aspect is very important when you do, for example, segmentation exercises.
You should say what the product should look like, the product for this segment.
This means that you cannot sell one product to pursue the goal of mass marketing.
The product for each segment means not only the basic product,
but also the whole service that provides a timely supply to the client.
Please, think about how you design your product.
A little hint.
I would like you to understand that a segment focused on price will never buy a product if the price is high.
So, offer this product to it, but remove this product from all the loads that are possible.
Make it basic.
For segments focused on quality, service and long-term relationship, there should be other products.
It is very difficult to imagine for a company that sells metal,
which does not even see the difference between the fact that there are buyers from one and the other segments.
The segmentation of the market is a very important element.
The segmentation that Mr. Kotler offers is more famous in Russia.
He segments consumers by classes.
For example, the upper class, the middle class, the lower class.
In addition, each class has its subgroups.
I would like to say that Mr. Kotler is very diverse.
For example, here I am bringing the so-called segmentation of the upper class,
which was developed by English marketologists.
Please, note that in this segmentation there is also a division of income for people,
in accordance with where they live.
Nevertheless, for me it is also very important how marketologists call these segments.
The traditional American approach of the upper, middle or lower class
is broken down into very creative names of segments.
The people who succeed, in England, they are 19.8%,
the people who expand, they are a little more than 11%,
the people who grow, the people who are stable, who strive and who make their way.
I always ask my students,
where do you see yourself in this segmentation?
The segmentation of the upper class is very creative,
because it allows to understand that each of the groups consumes different products,
reads different newspapers, visits different places of rest.
The final task of this course.
When I say that you are doing market segmentation,
I would like you to realize the following.
Market segmentation is not some kind of intellectual exercise
that allows you to understand that there are rich and poor clients,
there are large and small enterprises.
Segmentation is a tool that shows the company,
in fact, the shareholder often, how we can increase sales.
Therefore, I say that the key task of this topic is the following.
Segment your consumers as you like.
For this, read a textbook or think about how it looks in real life.
Next, formulate the goals for each segment in the context of increasing sales.
What does this mean?
What do you want to get from this segment?
Increase sales, or save current sales, or, on the contrary, reduce sales.
And third, you must determine the key factor of impact on this segment.
What does this mean?
How can marketing influence this segment to achieve the goal?
To tell the truth, when I talk about this approach to segmentation,
I mean that every company should have its own marketing policy.
Once I had to face an unusual situation in Russia.
One of the listeners of my seminar came to the seminar and said
that her new general director demanded a marketing policy from her.
She asked me what a marketing policy is.
Looking into her eyes, I said that a marketing policy is this slide.
Because your director would like to understand
if there are any differences in the buyers of your products
and how the company affects each of these buyers.
If you don't have this task, consider that you don't have a marketing policy.
Rather, you have a domestic policy,
related to various types of shares and manipulations of the assortment or price.
But you don't have a marketing policy.
The most interesting, I think, from the point of view of analysis,
choice of target segments, is the model that was proposed by the British Deep Simkin.
It is called ABC method.
This method is very unusual for Russians,
because it shows the following system of assessments.
Any company has sales volumes in a given segment.
Sales volumes can be high, medium or low.
The company receives a margin from the sale of its products in the segment.
It can be low, medium or high.
If you look at this slide,
the ideal marketing happens when you choose segments in such a way
that the maximum sales come to the segment that brings the highest margin.
And the minimum sales come to the segment that brings the minimum margin.
This is called ABC method.
Look, ABC method in the performance of Deep Simkin
is a little different from the traditional one.
So, the task of marketing is to choose segments that bring the maximum margin
and provide the maximum sales in this segment.
Then, to find a segment that brings the average margin and provides the average sales.
And finally, the segment that brings us the minimum margin
should take up a very small share of our sales.
Unfortunately, when we discuss this model at seminars,
I pay attention to the fact that business in Russian companies is built the opposite way.
It's a kind of mirror.
As a rule, the volume of sales for products that bring the minimum margin is the maximum.
And where the products are sold with a high margin, there is almost a minimum sale.
Imagine this situation in this way.
I'm asked, how can it be otherwise?
I remember a very funny story that a student told me.
At one of my courses, she said,
buying expensive and selling cheap is the easiest thing.
But learning to sell expensive and buy cheap is the art of business.